.\"	$Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt LOWDOWN 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lowdown
.Nd simple markdown translator library
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb liblowdown
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/queue.h
.In stdio.h
.In lowdown.h
.Vt "struct lowdown_opts"
.Vt "struct lowdown_metadata"
.Vt "enum lowdown_err"
.Ft "typedef void"
.Fo "(*lowdown_msg)"
.Fa "enum lowdown_err err"
.Fa "void *arg"
.Fa "const char *msg"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm lowdown
library parses Markdown into HTML or roff
.Pq Fl ms No or Fl man No macro sets .
It consists of both a high-level interface consisting of
.Xr lowdown_buf 3
and
.Xr lowdown_file 3 ,
then a series of low-level interfaces directly to the parsers and
renderers.
.Pp
Most functions use the
.Vt struct lowdown_opts
structure to manage features.
.Bd -literal
struct lowdown_opts {
	lowdown_msg msg;
	enum lowdown_type type;
	void *arg;
	unsigned int feat;
	unsigned int oflags;
};
.Ed
.Pp
It has the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va arg
Pointer passed to
.Va msg ,
if not
.Dv NULL .
.It Va feat
Features used during the parse.
This bit-field may have the following bits OR'd:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Dv LOWDOWN_TABLES
Allow for GFM tables.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_FENCED
Allow for GFM fenced (language-specific) code blocks.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_FOOTNOTES
MMD style footnotes.
This only supports one-liner footnotes on the same line as the footnote
definition (not the in-line referent).
.It Dv LOWDOWN_AUTOLINK
Autolink
.Li http ,
.Li https ,
.Li ftp ,
.Li mailto ,
and relative links or link fragments.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_STRIKE
Strikethrough support.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_HILITE
Highlight.
Do not use this option.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_SUPER
Allow for super-scripts.
This accepts foo^bar, which puts the parts following the caret until
whitespace in superscripts; or foo^(bar), which puts only the parts in
parenthesis.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_MATH
Recognise single-dollar math mode.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_NOINTEM
Disable emphasis with links.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_SPHD
Require a space between hash marks and header.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_MATHEXP
Recognise double-dollar math mode.
This only works if
.Dv LOWDOWN_MATH
has also been set.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_NOCODEIND
Do not indent code blocks.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_METADATA
Accept MMD metadata.
For the first paragraph to count as meta-data, the first line must have
a colon in it.
Otherwise it's considered a regular paragraph.
Meta-data is escaped according to the output mode; and if the
.Dv LOWDOWN_SMARTY
flag is set, also smartypantsed.
.El
.Pp
The default value is zero (none).
.It Va msg
Message function
.Pq Vt lowdown_msg
for logging messages.
If
.Dv NULL ,
messages are not logged.
.It Va ofeat
Features used by the output generators.
This bit-field may have the following enabled.
Note that bits are by definition specific to an output
.Va type .
.Pp
For
.Dv LOWDOWN_HTML :
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Dv LOWDOWN_HTML_SKIP_HTML
Do not render in-document HTML at all.
Note that
.Dv LOWDOWN_HTML_ESCAPE
takes priority if both are specified.
Text within HTML elements remains.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_HTML_ESCAPE
Leaves in-line HTML in its source form as if it were opaque text.
Takes precedence over
.Dv LOWDOWN_HTML_ESCAPE .
.It Dv LOWDOWN_HTML_HARD_WRAP
Retain line-breaks within paragraphs.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_HTML_HEAD_IDS
Have an identifier written with each header element consisting of an
HTML-escaped version of the header contents.
.El
.Pp
And for
.Dv LOWDOWN_MAN
and
.Dv LOWDOWN_NROFF :
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Dv LOWDOWN_NROFF_SKIP_HTML
Do not render in-document HTML at all.
Text within HTML elements remains.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_NROFF_HARD_WRAP
Retain line-breaks within paragraphs.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_NROFF_NUMBERED
Use numbered sections.
Only applies to the
.Dv LOWDOWN_NROFF
output type.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_NROFF_GROFF
Use GNU extensions (i.e., for
.Xr groff 1 )
when rendering output.
You'll need to include
.Fl m Ar pdfmark
when invoking
.Xr groff 1
for formatting links.
.El
.Pp
For any mode, you may specify:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Dv LOWDOWN_SMARTY
Don't use
.Dq smartypants
formatting.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_STANDALONE
Emit a full document instead of a document fragment.
Parts of this envelope may be populated from metadata if
.Dv LOWDOWN_METADATA
was provided as an option.
See
.Xr lowdown 1
for details.
.El
.It Va type
May be set to
.Dv LOWDOWN_HTML
for HTML5 output,
.Dv LOWDOWN_MAN
for
.Fl man
macros, or
.Dv LOWDOWN_NROFF
for
.Fl ms
macros.
The
.Dv LOWDOWN_TREE
type causes a debug tree to be written.
.Pp
Both
.Dv LOWDOWN_MAN
and
.Dv LOWDOWN_MS
will use troff tables, which usually require the
.Xr tbl 1
preprocessor.
.El
.Pp
Another common structure is
.Vt "struct lowdown_metadata" ,
which is used to hold parsed (and output-formatted) metadata keys and
values if
.Dv LOWDOWN_METADATA
has been provided was provided as an input bit.
.Bd -literal
struct lowdown_meta {
	char *key;
	char *value;
};
.Ed
.Pp
This structure consists of the following fields:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Va key
The metadata key in its lowercase, canonical form.
.It Va value
The metadata value as rendered in the current output format.
.El
.Pp
A error message function of type
.Vt lowdown_msg
is given in
.Vt "struct lowdown_opts" .
.Bd -literal
typedef	void (*lowdown_msg)
	(enum lowdown_err, void *, const char *);
.Ed
.Pp
It accepts the following arguments:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fa err
An error code programmatically describing the error.
.It Fa arg
An opaque pointer provided in
.Vt "struct lowdown_opts" .
.It Fa msg
Additional information about the error.
.El
.Pp
The error code may be one of:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Dv LOWDOWN_ERR_SPACE_BEFORE_LINK
Spaces before the URL portion of a link.
This is not portable.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_ERR_METADATA_BAD_CHAR
A bad character in a metadata key (it is converted into
.Dq ? ) .
.It Dv LOWDOWN_ERR_UNKNOWN_FOOTNOTE
A footnote reference to an unknown footnote, and is thus being ignored.
.It Dv LOWDOWN_ERR_DUPE_FOOTNOTE
A duplicate footnote reference was encountered, and is thus being ignored.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lowdown 1 ,
.Xr lowdown_buf 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_doc_free 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_doc_new 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_doc_parse 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_errstr 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_file 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_html_free 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_html_new 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_html_rndr 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_nroff_free 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_nroff_new 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_nroff_rndr 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_tree_free 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_tree_new 3 ,
.Xr lowdown_tree_rndr 3
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
library was forked by
.An Kristaps Dzonsons Aq Mt kristaps@bsd.lv
from
.Lk https://github.com/hoedown/hoedown hoedown .
It has been considerably changed since then.
