.\"	$Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Kristaps Dzonsons <kristaps@bsd.lv>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate: September 1 2017 $
.Dt LOWDOWN_BUF 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lowdown_buf
.Nd parse a Markdown buffer into formatted output
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb liblowdown
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/queue.h
.In stdio.h
.In lowdown.h
.Ft void
.Fo lowdown_buf
.Fa "const struct lowdown_opts *opts"
.Fa "const unsigned char *buf"
.Fa "size_t bufsz"
.Fa "unsigned char **ret"
.Fa "size_t *retsz"
.Fa "struct lowdown_meta **meta"
.Fa "size_t *metasz"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
function is a convenience function to parse a Markdown buffer
.Fa buf
of size
.Fa bufsz
into an output buffer
.Fa ret
of size
.Fa retsz
in one of several formats defined in
.Fa opts .
If metadata parsing is enabled in the options,
.Fa meta
is returned as an array of metadata of size
.Fa metasz
rendered in the given output format.
See
.Xr lowdown 3
for a description of the
.Fa opts
variable and metadata.
.Pp
Internally,
.Nm
invokes
.Xr lowdown_doc_new 3
with the given
.Fa opts ,
creates a renderer for the output format,
parses the input with
.Xr lowdown_doc_parse 3 ,
renders the AST in the given output format,
and returns the rendered content as a buffer along with any parsed
metadata (if applicable).
.Pp
The caller is responsible for freeing the output buffer and metadata
contents.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lowdown 3
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
function will invoke
.Xr exit 3
if internal memory allocation fails.
There is no way to catch this condition.
