.SH ERRORS
.LP
\fBwrite\fP(), \fBpwrite\fP(), \fBwritev\fP(), and \fBpwritev\fP() will fail and the file pointer will remain unchanged
if:
.TP 3
[EBADF]
\fId\fP is not a valid descriptor open for writing.
.TP 3
[EFBIG]
An attempt was made to write a file that exceeds the process\(cqs file size
limit or the maximum file size.
.TP 3
[ENOSPC]
There is no free space remaining on the file system containing the file.
.TP 3
[EDQUOT]
The user\(cqs quota of disk blocks on the file system containing the file has
been exhausted.
.TP 3
[EINTR]
A write to a slow device (i.e. one that might block for an arbitrary amount
of time) was interrupted by the delivery of a signal before any data could
be written.
.TP 3
[EIO]
An I/O error occurred while reading from or writing to the file system.
.TP 3
[EFAULT]
Part of buf points outside the process\(cqs allocated address space.
.LP
In addition, \fBwrite\fP() and \fBwritev\fP() may return the following errors:
.TP 3
[EPIPE]
An attempt is made to write to a pipe that is not open for reading by any
process.
.TP 3
[EPIPE]
An attempt is made to write to a socket of type \fISOCK_STREAM\fP that is not
connected to a peer socket.
.TP 3
[EAGAIN]
The file was marked for non-blocking I/O, and no data could be written
immediately.
.TP 3
[ENETDOWN]
The destination address specified a network that is down.
.TP 3
[EDESTADDRREQ]
The destination is no longer available when writing to a Unix-domain
datagram socket on which 
.MR connect 2
had been used to set a destination
address.
.TP 3
[EIO]
The process is a member of a background process attempting to write to its
controlling terminal, \fITOSTOP\fP is set on the terminal, the process isn\(cqt
ignoring the \fISIGTTOUT\fP signal and the thread isn\(cqt blocking the \fISIGTTOUT\fP
signal, and either the process was created with 
.MR vfork 2
and hasn\(cqt
successfully executed one of the exec functions or the process group is
orphaned.
.LP
\fBwrite\fP() and \fBpwrite\fP() may return the following error:
.TP 3
[EINVAL]
nbytes was larger than \fISSIZE_MAX\fP.
.LP
\fBpwrite\fP() and \fBpwritev\fP() may return the following error:
.TP 3
[EINVAL]
offset was negative.
.TP 3
[ESPIPE]
\fId\fP is associated with a pipe, socket, FIFO, or tty.
.LP
\fBwritev\fP() and \fBpwritev\fP() may return one of the following errors:
.TP 3
[EINVAL]
iovcnt was less than or equal to 0, or greater than \fIIOV_MAX\fP.
.TP 3
[EINVAL]
The sum of the \fIiov_len\fP values in the iov array overflowed an \fIssize_t\fP.
.TP 3
[EFAULT]
Part of iov points outside the process\(cqs allocated address space.
.TP 3
[ENOBUFS]
The system lacked sufficient buffer space or a queue was full.
